Update episode 08-development-setup (#189)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool_Tutorial: _episodes/08-development-setup.md

> [Git](https://git-scm.com/). You can refresh your knowledge in the
> corresponding [Git carpentries course](http://swcarpentry.github.io/git-novice/).
{: .callout}

## Development installation

We’ll explore how ESMValTool can be installed it in a ``develop`` mode.
Even if you aren’t collaborating with the community, this installation is needed
to run your new codes by ESMValTool.
Let’s get started.

### 1 Source code

The ESMValTool source code is available on a public GitHub repository:
[https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool).
To obtain the code, the easiest way is to clone the repository:

~~~bash
git clone https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool.git
~~~

This command will ask your GitHub username and a personal **token** as password.
Please follow instructions on
[GitHub token authentication requirements][token-authentication-requirements]
to create a personal access token.
After the authentication, a folder called ``ESMValTool`` is created in your working directory.
This folder contains the source code of the tool.
To continue the installation, we move into the ``ESMValTool`` directory

> and check out the ``master`` branch:

Author: correct, it is replaced by a note that it is the default.

~~~bash
cd ESMValTool
git checkout master

> ~~~

Author: I added the output of git clone and git status. Please let me know if it is not what you meant.

### 2 ESMValTool dependencies

It is recommended to use conda to manage ESMValTool dependencies. For a minimal
conda installation, see section **Install Conda** in lesson
[Installation]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/02-installation.md %}).
To simplify the installation process, an environment file ``environment.yml`` is
provided in the ESMValTool directory. We create an environment by running:

~~~bash
conda env create --file environment.yml
~~~

The environment is called ``esmvaltool`` by default. Now, we should activate the environment:

~~~bash
conda activate esmvaltool
~~~

> ## environment name
>
> If an ``esmvaltool`` environment is already created following the lesson
> [Installation]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/02-installation.md %}),
> first delete it or choose another name for the new environment in this lesson.
> For more information see
> [conda managing environments][manage-environments].

> {: .callout}

Author: Agree, I added your suggestion.

### 3 ESMValTool installation

ESMValTool can be installed in a ``develop`` mode by running:

~~~bash
pip install --editable '.[develop]'
~~~

This will add the ``esmvaltool`` directory to the Python path in editable mode and
install the development dependencies. We should check if the installation
works properly. To do this, run the tool with:

~~~bash
esmvaltool --help
~~~

If installation is successful, ESMValTool prints a help message to the console.
For more details about development installation, see ESMValTool documentation on

> [install from source][install-from-source].

Author: Agree, I remove the link to the documentation from here.

> [install from source][install-from-source].

Reviewer: It's still there, right?

> [install from source][install-from-source].

Author: oops, my bad, it is removed now.

> the ``esmvaltool`` environment.
> Use this command to check that ESMValTool is installed in a ``develop`` mode.
>
> **Tips**: see the
> [documentation on conda list](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/commands/list.html).
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> Run:
>>
>> ~~~bash
>> conda list esmvaltool
>>~~~
>>
>> ~~~bash
>> # Name                    Version                   Build  Channel
>> esmvaltool                2.1.1                     dev_0    <develop>
>>~~~
>>
>> As can be seen, it is mentioned ``<develop>`` under the ``Channel``.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Contribution

ESMValTool is an open-source project in ESMValGroup.
We can contribute to its development by:

- a new or updated recipe script, see lesson on
[Writing your own recipe]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/05-preprocessor.md %})
- a new or updated diagnostics script, see lesson on
[Writing your own diagnostic script]
- a new or updated cmorizer script, see lesson on
[CMORization: Using observational datasets]
- helping  with reviewing process of pull requests, see ESMValTool documentation on
[Review of pull requests](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/review.html)

> The next sections will explore the ways we can achieve this.

Author: Agree, the paragraph is moved to the top. I also added a paragraph similar to what you suggested.

### Review process

We first discuss our idea in an
**[issue](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/issues)** in ESMValTool repository.
Then, we create a new ``branch`` locally and start developing new codes.
Once our development is finished, we can initiate a ``pull request``.
For a full description of the GitHub workflow, please see ESMValTool documentation on
[GitHub Workflow](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/repository.html#github-workflow).

The pull request will be tested, discussed and merged. This is called "**review process**".
The process will take some effort and time to learn.
However, a few “tools” i.e. command lines gets you a long way,

> and we’ll cover those essentials in the next sections.

Author: Nice suggestion! I added a tip similar to what you said here.

### Check code quality

We aim to adhere to best practices and coding standards. The good news is that there are
several tools that we can use to check our code against those standards.

As an example, ``Pre-commit`` is a tool that checks your code for any invalid syntax
and formatting errors. It also fixes some of those errors.
To explore other tools, have a look at ESMValTool documentation on

> [Code style](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/introduction.html#code-style).

Author: I added the list of the tools as you suggested. However, I didn't remove the link to the documentation as there is some info in the documentation that is beyond the scope of this lesson. Also, I think neither documentation nor this tutorial should cover details about these tools. Because they are related to best practices and code refinery lessons. We might just point users to those resources. This is also in line with what you mentioned about duplicate information.

>> yapf.....................................................................Passed
>> docformatter.............................................................Failed
>> - hook id: docformatter
>> - files were modified by this hook
>> flake8...................................................................Failed
>> - hook id: flake8
>> - exit code: 1
>>
>> esmvaltool/diag_scripts/examples/warming_stripes.py:20:5:
>> F841 local variable 'nx' is assigned to but never used
>> ~~~
>>
>> As can be seen above, there are two ``Failed`` check:
>>
>> 1. ``docformatter``: it is mentioned that "files were modified by this hook".
>> We run ``git diff`` to see the modifications.
>> The syntax ``"""`` at the end of docstring is moved by one line.
>> 2. ``flake8``: the error message is about an unused local variable ``nx``.
>> We should check our codes regarding the usage of ``nx``.
>> For now, let's assume that it is added by mistake and remove it.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

### Run unit tests

Previous section introduced some tools to check code style and quality.
What it hasen’t done is show us how to tell whether our code is getting the right answer.

> To achieve that, we can run tests using ``pytest`` locally:

Author: It is added as you suggested.

~~~bash
conda activate esmvaltool
cd ESMValTool

> git checkout your_branch_name

Author: right, they are removed.

> to the the ``esmvaltool/recipes/example`` directory:
>
> ~~~bash
> cd ESMValTool
> git checkout your_branch_name
> cp path_of_recipe_warming_stripes.yml esmvaltool/recipes/examples/
> ~~~
>
> Run ``pytest`` and inspect the results. If a test is failed, try to fix it.
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> Run:
>>
>> ~~~bash
>> pytest
>> ~~~
>>
>> When ``pytest`` run is complete, you can inspect the test reports
>> that are printed in the console. Have a look at the second section of the report
>> ``FAILURES``:
>>
>> ~~~ bash
>> ================================ FAILURES ==========================================
>> ______________ test_recipe_valid[examples/recipe_warming_stripes.yml] ______________
>> ~~~
>>
>> The test message shows that the recipe ``recipe_warming_stripes.yml`` is not a valid recipe.
>> Look for a line that starts with an ``E`` in the rest of the message:
>>
>> ~~~ bash
>>
>> E           esmvalcore._task.DiagnosticError: Cannot execute script
>> '~/esmvaltool_tutorial/warming_stripes.py' (~/esmvaltool_tutorial/warming_stripes.py):
>> file does not exist.
>>~~~
>>
>> It seems that we need to set a correct path for the diagnostic script

> >> ``warming_stripes.py`` in our recipe!

Author: To address this comment, I added a background section in the contribution, and revise the text and exercises. Please have a look again and let me know if it is still confusing.

> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

### Build documentation

> Documentations are available on

Author: An introductory sentence is now added.

> Documentations are available on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ESMValTool documentation is available on
```
I think words like documentation and codes are usually 'mass nouns' or 'uncountable nouns', so I would avoid using plural forms like 'codes' or 'documentations'. Just like 'water'.

[docs.esmvaltool.org](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/index.html).
The source files are located in ``ESMValTool/doc/sphinx/source/``.
To build documentations locally, we run:

~~~bash
conda activate esmvaltool
cd ESMValTool

> git checkout your_branch_name

Author: Absolutely right. It is now removed.

python setup.py build_sphinx -Ea
~~~

Similar to codes, documentations should be well written and adhere to standards.
If documentations are buit properly, the previous command prints a message to the console:

~~~bash
build succeeded.

The HTML pages are in doc/sphinx/build/html.
~~~

The main page of the documentation has been built into ``index.html``
in ``doc/sphinx/build/html`` directory.
To preview this page locally, we open the file in a web browser:

~~~bash
xdg-open doc/sphinx/build/html/index.html
~~~

> ## Creating a documenation
>
> In previous exercises, we added the recipe
> [recipe_warming_stripes.yml](../files/recipe_warming_stripes.yml) to ESMValTool.
> Now, we create a documentation file ``recipe_warming_stripes.rst`` for this recipe:
>
> ~~~bash
> nano doc/sphinx/source/recipes/recipe_warming_stripes.rst
> ~~~
>
> Add a reference i.e. ``.. _recipe_warming_stripes:``, a section title
> and some text about the recipe like:
>

> > ~~~markdown

Author: I think `markdown` is one of the languages supported for the code block. However, our template does not support too many languages see [here](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool_Tutorial/blob/ff50d10915459a51336bfdc94716b46cffbdbd4a/bin/lesson_check.py#L73) . I replaced `~~~ `as you suggested. The test is passed but it does not render nicely as before.

[Installation]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/02-installation.md %}),
we should choose another name for the new environment in this lesson by:

~~~bash
conda env create -n a_new_name --file environment.yml
~~~

For more information see [conda managing environments][manage-environments].
Now, we should activate the environment:

~~~bash
conda activate esmvaltool
~~~

### 3 ESMValTool installation

ESMValTool can be installed in a ``develop`` mode by running:

~~~bash
pip install --editable '.[develop]'
~~~

This will add the ``esmvaltool`` directory to the Python path in editable mode and
install the development dependencies. We should check if the installation
works properly. To do this, run the tool with:

~~~bash
esmvaltool --help
~~~

If installation is successful, ESMValTool prints a help message to the console.
For more details about development installation, see ESMValTool documentation on
[install from source][install-from-source].

> ## Checking the development installation
>
> We can use the command ``conda list`` to list installed packages in
> the ``esmvaltool`` environment.
> Use this command to check that ESMValTool is installed in a ``develop`` mode.
>

> > **Tips**: see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Tip**: see the
```

>> esmvaltool                2.1.1                     dev_0    <develop>
>>~~~
>>
>> As can be seen, it is mentioned ``<develop>`` under the ``Channel``.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

## Contribution

We have seen how to install ESMValTool in a ``develop`` mode.
Now, we try to contribute to its development. Let's see how we can achieve this.

### Review process

We first discuss our ideas in an
**[issue](https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/issues)** in ESMValTool repository.
This can avoid disappointment at a later stage, for example,
if more people are doing the same thing.
It also gives other people an early opportunity to provide input and suggestions,
which results in more valuable contributions.

Then, we create a new ``branch`` locally and start developing new codes.
Once our development is finished, we can initiate a ``pull request``.
For a full description of the GitHub workflow, please see ESMValTool documentation on
[GitHub Workflow](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/community/repository.html#github-workflow).

The pull request will be tested, discussed and merged. This is called "**review process**".
The process will take some effort and time to learn.

> However, a few “tools” i.e. command lines gets you a long way,
> and we’ll cover those essentials in the next sections.

Reviewer: This sentence is not grammatically correct, can you rephrase it? Suggestion: 
```suggestion
However, a few (command line) tools can get you a long way,
and we’ll cover those essentials in the next sections.
```

> **Tips**: we encourage you to keep the pull requests small.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Tip**: we encourage you to keep the pull requests small.
```

Reviewing small incremental changes are more efficient.

### Background

We saw 'warming stripes' in lesson
[Writing your own recipe]({{ page.root }}{% link _episodes/05-preprocessor.md %}).
Imagine the following task: you want to contribute warming stripes recipe and diagnostics
to ESMValTool. You have to add the diagnostics
[warming_stripes.py](../files/warming_stripes.py) and the recipe
[recipe_warming_stripes.yml](../files/recipe_warming_stripes.yml)
to their locations in ESMValTool directory.
After these changes, you should also check if everthing works fine.

> This is where we take advantage of the tools that are introduced later.

Reviewer: Just a development tip from my side: I'm using the 'rewrap' extension in vscode. This let's you auto-wrap lines with `alt+Q` so you don't exceed the line length. I find that super useful for these kind of text blocks.

Author: I just tried this extension, very cool, thank you for the suggestion.

Let’s get started.

### Check code quality

We aim to adhere to best practices and coding standards. There are
several tools that check our code against those standards like:

> - flake8 for checking against the PEP8 style guide
> - yapf to ensure consistent formatting for the whole project
> - isort to consistently sort the import statements
> - yamllint to ensure there are no syntax errors in our recipes and config files
> - lintr for diagnostic scripts written in R
> - codespell to check grammar

Reviewer: Can we make those bold or link to their docs?

```suggestion
- [flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/en/latest/#) for checking against the PEP8 style guide
- [yapf](https://pypi.org/project/yapf/) to ensure consistent formatting for the whole project
- [isort](https://pypi.org/project/isort/) to consistently sort the import statements
- [yamllint](https://yamllint.readthedocs.io/en/stable/#) to ensure there are no syntax errors in our recipes and config files
- [lintr](https://github.com/jimhester/lintr) for diagnostic scripts written in R
- [codespell](https://pypi.org/project/codespell/) to check grammar
```

>> isort....................................................................Passed
>> yapf.....................................................................Passed
>> docformatter.............................................................Failed
>> - hook id: docformatter
>> - files were modified by this hook
>> flake8...................................................................Failed
>> - hook id: flake8
>> - exit code: 1
>>
>> esmvaltool/diag_scripts/warming_stripes.py:20:5:
>> F841 local variable 'nx' is assigned to but never used
>> ~~~
>>
>> As can be seen above, there are two ``Failed`` check:
>>
>> 1. ``docformatter``: it is mentioned that "files were modified by this hook".
>> We run ``git diff`` to see the modifications.
>> The syntax ``"""`` at the end of docstring is moved by one line.
>> 2. ``flake8``: the error message is about an unused local variable ``nx``.
>> We should check our codes regarding the usage of ``nx``.
>> For now, let's assume that it is added by mistake and remove it.
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

### Run unit tests

Previous section introduced some tools to check code style and quality.

> What it hasen’t done is show us how to tell whether our code is getting the right answer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What it hasn’t done is show us how to tell whether our code is getting the right answer.
```

>
> ~~~bash
> cp path_of_recipe_warming_stripes.yml esmvaltool/recipes/
> ~~~
>
> Run ``pytest`` and inspect the results. If a test is failed, try to fix it.
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> Run:
>>
>> ~~~bash
>> pytest
>> ~~~
>>
>> When ``pytest`` run is complete, you can inspect the test reports
>> that are printed in the console. Have a look at the second section of the report
>> ``FAILURES``:
>>
>> ~~~ bash
>> ================================ FAILURES ==========================================
>> ______________ test_recipe_valid[recipe_warming_stripes.yml] ______________
>> ~~~
>>
>> The test message shows that the recipe ``recipe_warming_stripes.yml`` is not a valid recipe.
>> Look for a line that starts with an ``E`` in the rest of the message:
>>
>> ~~~ bash
>>
>> E           esmvalcore._task.DiagnosticError: Cannot execute script
>> '~/esmvaltool_tutorial/warming_stripes.py' (~/esmvaltool_tutorial/warming_stripes.py):
>> file does not exist.
>> ~~~
>>
>> To fix the recipe, we need to edit the path of the diagnostic script
>> as ``warming_stripes.py``:
>>
>> ~~~yml
>>    scripts:
>>      warming_stripes_script:
>>        script: warming_stripes.py
>> ~~~
>>
>> For details, see lesson

> >> [Writing your own diagnostic script].

Reviewer: Maybe add a dead link for now?
```suggestion
>> [Writing your own diagnostic script](#).
```

>>
> {: .solution}
{: .challenge}

### Build documentation

When we add or update a code, we also update its corresponding documentation.
Documentations are available on
[docs.esmvaltool.org](https://docs.esmvaltool.org/en/latest/index.html).
The source files are located in ``ESMValTool/doc/sphinx/source/``.

> To build documentations locally, first we make sure that the working directory is ``ESMValTool``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build documentation locally, first we make sure that the working directory is ``ESMValTool``
```

and our local branch is checked out. Then, we run:

~~~bash
python setup.py build_sphinx -Ea
~~~

> Similar to codes, documentations should be well written and adhere to standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to code, documentation should be well written and adhere to standards.
```

If the documentation is built properly, the previous command prints a message to the console:

> ~~~bash
> build succeeded.
> 
> The HTML pages are in doc/sphinx/build/html.
> ~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~
build succeeded.

The HTML pages are in doc/sphinx/build/html.
~~~
{: .output}
```

> ~~~
>
> Add a reference i.e. ``.. _recipe_warming_stripes:``, a section title
> and some text about the recipe like:
>
> ```
> .. _recipe_warming_stripes:
>
> Reproducing Ed Hawkins' warming stripes visualization
> ======================================================
>
> This recipe produces warming stripes plots.
> ```
>
> Save and close the file. We can think of this file as one page of a book.
> Then, we need to decide where this page should be located inside the book.
> The table of content is defined by ``index.rst``. Let's have a look at the content:
>
> ~~~bash
> nano doc/sphinx/source/recipes/index.rst
> ~~~
>
> Add the recipe name i.e. ``recipe_warming_stripes`` to the section ``Other`` in this file
> and preview the recipe documentation page locally.
>
>> ## Solution
>>
>> First, we add the recipe name ``recipe_warming_stripes`` to the section ``Other``:
>>
>> ```
>> Other
>> ^^^^^
>> .. toctree::
>>   :maxdepth: 1
>>   ...
>>   ...
>>   recipe_warming_stripes
>> ```
>>
>> Then, we build and preview the documentation page:
>>
>> ~~~bash
>> python setup.py build_sphinx -Ea
>> xdg-open doc/sphinx/build/html/recipes/recipe_warming_stripes.html
>> ~~~
>>
> {: .solution}

> {: .challenge}

Reviewer: A closing remark would be nice. Something like

```suggestion
{: .challenge}

Congratulations! You are now ready to make a pull request.
```
